Okay, so in this lesson we're going to
talk about two things that Claude Code
can do. Planning and thinking, which are
both two very different things. Thinking
is when you ask Claude code to think
about a solution before writing any
code. And planning is when Claude puts
together its own plan of action on how
it intends to implement some features
and asks you to approve it. So let's
start with planning. And you might have
caught a glimpse of this at the end of
the last lesson where we used Alt plus M
to cycle through the autoedit option
down here. So, if I press AltM once, I
turn on the accept edits feature. But if
I press it twice, we go into the
planning mode instead. Now, planning
mode is good for when you're giving
Claude code a task which has a wide
breadth of changes over several
different files. But where individually
each of those changes might not
necessarily be complex. They could be,
but maybe not. Still, the scope of those
changes might be quite wide. And with a
plan, it makes easier for Claude Code to
stay on track and complete each task in
order. So then let's keep planning mode
on and we're going to ask it to do the
following. Can you make a custom
component for an avatar? No pick only
initial and find any places in the
project where it can replace avatar like
templates. So I'm going to press enter
now and see what it comes up with.
So first of all, it's analyzing the
codebase to understand where an avatar
component could be useful. So it's
searching things. It's reading different
files.
All right. And now it's come up with a
plan right here. So if we scroll to the
top, you can see it's discovered avatar
like implementations in the blog system
in a few different places in the blog
post cards and also in recent activity
in the sidebar. So it's detected those
and then it's proposing this avatar
component. So it's in the correct place
inside the UI folder, then an avatar
folder, then avatar.tsx.
So, it's going to have the initial based
avatar, which is going to be the first
letter from their name. Multiple sizes,
color variants, consistent styling. So,
it's kind of following the same pattern
as the button component, which is nice.
So, for the implementation plan, it's
going to first of all create the avatar
component, then replace the existing
avatar code in the blog post cards, and
it even specifies exactly where it's
going to do that for us. Then it says
it's going to work on the blog sidebar
and it's going to add the avatar to
individual blog posts as well inside the
blog post details page. Then it's going
to create a test file to follow the
existing button test patterns so it can
be tested on the avatar component as
well. And then we're going to add a link
to the avatar preview in the header
navigation. So you can go ahead and
accept this plan or you can accept the
plan but then keep manually approving
any edits or you can say no and keep
planning and provide feedback for the
plan so it adjusts the plan. So I'm
going to select the first option up here
which is yes and auto accept edits.
Okay. So down here it is saying it wants
to run this bash command npm run test
and I want to select the second option
which is yes and don't ask me again for
npm run test commands. And when I do
that, it should automatically go into
the settings.local file right here,
which we can see it does. Awesome.
All right. So, this time it's trying to
link the file. And again, I'm going to
choose the second option down here.
Okay. And then finally, it looks like
it's done. So, it's checked off
everything from the plan it created. All
the tests are passing. And if we close
this off and take a look over here, we
should be able to see that new avatar
folder. And okay, so it's actually
created a full page for the avatar. Now,
maybe that was in the plan and I didn't
fully understand it. I thought it was
just going to add it to the preview
page. But you see, this is where
sometimes AI can go wrong. Claude Code,
Copilot, whatever you're using. So, it's
important to keep it on track. Either
way, it doesn't so much matter for this
particular task. Um, it's just to
preview it after all. And I can delete
this page afterwards. But you can see
we've got this component folder down
here, avatar. We've got the test file
and the avatar component itself. So,
we've got the default size right here
set to medium. The variant is gradient.
But we have these different variant
options up here in different sizes as
well for the props. Um we have the size
classes, the variant classes, and then
down here we have the avatar itself.
Okay. So let's see if this works in the
browser. All right. So you can see added
the avatar page and the link to the
header. So it did get a little bit
trigger happy. And now if we take a look
down here, we can see all the different
variants that we have, the different
sizes, even use cases down here. So I
think this is all really really nice.
It's created that component and shown us
different ways we can use it. Now if I
go to the actual blog part of the
website, you can see it's now using that
avatar here. It's using it down here as
well inside recent activity. And if I
was to select an individual blog like
this one right here, you can see we have
the avatar on the blog details as well.
So, the only thing it did really that I
didn't want it to do was place the
avatar link up here and create a full
page for the avatars when I specified in
a claw.md file that they should go
inside the preview uh file. So, maybe I
wasn't specific enough. Maybe I looked
over the plan too quickly. I don't know.
But this is easy to rectify. I can just
delete these pages, no problem. So I
just told claw code to remove the avatar
page and instead put all of the samples
inside the preview page and it's gone
ahead and done that which is good. I've
also updated the claw MD file with this
more specific instruction at the bottom
which says now when making new page
components always had a link to that
page in the header. So it did this for
our UI component. So I added this bit on
only do this for page components not UI
or other dropin components. So, I guess
this is a lesson in instructions and
also in how you have to be specific in
what you want Claude Code to do. Okay,
so that all work pretty well and I think
having plan mode turned on probably
helped Claude Code complete the task
correctly. Now, it may still have done
so without planning mode on, but when it
is turned on, I find it's worked to stay
on track more for tasks with a wider
scope. And arguably the scope wasn't
huge for this task, but it still
involved making a component, testing the
component, looking for places it can be
used, editing those files, etc. Anyway,
now let's look at thinking mode. Now,
thinking mode is good when you want
claude code to work on something that
includes more complex logic. So, not
necessarily a wide scope like planning
mode is for. It could be quite a narrow
scope, but one where the logic is more
complex. For example, I might want to
implement a comment system for the blog
where users can comment on the blogs.
And that would include perhaps some
thought about exactly how it should be
done, what services, if any, should be
used, what React components need to be
made, what additional pages might need
to be made, what about live updates and
how does this get structured and fit
well together in this application. So
for something like this, you would turn
on extended thinking mode, which does
consume more tokens, but it allows the
model to reason and think more about how
to complete something in a way that
actually works. Now, to be honest, we're
entering into the realms of vibe coding
when we ask the AI to implement a whole
system like this. And I would personally
break this down into smaller chunks or
tasks and work on each one one at a time
with Claude code so I could more easily
guide the AI to do what I want it to do.
But for the sake of this lesson and to
demonstrate thinking mode, we'll run
with this example. So let me paste in
this prompt right here first of all
which says implement a comment system
into the application where users can
authenticate and then comment on blog
posts. think hard about this
implementation, including the database,
schema, authentication services,
moderation, and real-time updates. I'm
also going to keep planning mode on so I
can see the plan that Claude code makes
as well. Now, I'm triggering think mode
in this prompt by using the word think
right here. And whenever Claude code
sees that in your prompt, that word,
it's going to use extended thinking
mode. So then, let me press enter now
and we'll see what Claude code does.
All right. So already in this kind of
gray color, you can see it's thinking
and this is the thinking process that it
has kind of behind the scenes. So by
using that think keyword in our prompt,
we've enabled this thinking mode.
All right. And now it's come up with the
plan. So that took a little bit longer,
but it's because Claude Code was
thinking. So, this is the plan and it's
quite extensive. There's a lot of steps
involved. All right. And anything in a
kind of faded gray up here. And this is
all of Claude's thinking. And it also
prefixes that if you like with this
little thinking uh text right here. So,
every time it's thinking about
something, you'll see that. All right.
Thinking. Thinking. So, it thinks quite
a lot. So, then I'm not going to go
ahead with these changes because that
would drastically change my project
right now. And I'd also have to set up
some external services as well. And
again, because I wouldn't normally let
AI completely loose on tasks like this,
I don't know which direction it's going
to go off in. Instead, I would break it
down into logical steps. Maybe taking
each of these checkpoints in the plan
and working on them individually. That
way, I can stay in a loop, check the
code in small steps manually, and make
changes myself where I need to along the
way. Doing everything at once sometimes
makes things harder in the long run. And
I find that pretty soon you're out of
the loop and you get sucked into this
kind of full-on vibe coding experience
where you're just asking Claw to fix
everything and ignoring the code
completely. So, I'm going to choose not
to do this now. But just very quickly
before we finish this video, I want to
mention that Claude Code does have
different levels of thinking that you
can activate. In the example I just
used, I said, "Think hard." But you can
also just say, "Think," and that's going
to trigger a smaller amount of thinking
and reasoning. Likewise, you can go the
other way by saying, "Think harder," and
that's going to crank the thinking up
even more. And if you want to go all in,
then you can ask Claude to ultra think,
which activates the hardest thinking
mode it has. But again, remember that
thinking consumes more tokens, and the
harder you ask Claw Code to think, the
more tokens it's going to use up. All
right then. So now we know a little bit
about planning and thinking. Next up
we'll talk about commands.